---
layout: post
title: Importance of verbal-cognition for skill acquisiton
subtitle: John F. Adamek
cover-img: /assets/img/skillbball.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/skillpod.jpg
share-img: /assets/img/skillbball.jpg
tags: [books, test]
---

A very rough rule of thumb, for someone to become an expert at a specific skill, would typically take at least 10 years or 10,000 hours of practice to accomplish. However, regardless if the end goal is to become an expert or just to simply learn a new skill, the same stages apply. The individual will go through a verbal – cognitive phase where they will spend the majority of their time learning and understanding what the requirements are to perform the skill successfully. This is normally seen by a trial and error approach where the individual will try different strategies in order to learn what works and what doesn’t. Following this the individual will progress to the associative phase where they have learned which strategy works to complete the skill and they work to fine-tune this strategy as best as possible. The final stage, and normally the stage you reach in order to become an expert, is the autonomous phase where the skill movement has become somewhat automatic and the individual can in theory perform this skill successfully without much effort needed. A key component needed for the individual to progress through these stages would be a combination of receiving feedback about their performance, having the correct type of practice approach, and countless hours of practice to allow for proper neuroplasticity to occur so that success of a movement occurs often.

Let’s take a group of young adults ranging from age 18-25 who have very little if any experience shooting a basketball into a basketball net from a free throw line. With just 10 minutes allowed to teach this movement, success would come strictly from the verbal-cognitive phase. This age range has a very high adaptability level and if taught how to do a movement successfully, would have a greater chance to accomplish the new skill. Utilizing only 10 minutes, I would spend the first three minutes teaching the individuals the absolute basics to accomplish shooting the basketball into the net. I would teach the importance of bending of the legs to execute power up the body and through the arms, as well as teaching them the science of having a higher arc of the shot in order to have a greater percentage of making the basket. Just these two verbal guidelines should be enough for the learner to understand first, how to generate power to reach the basketball net from the free throw line and second, the type of shot that would yield the greatest results to complete the task of making a basket.

The following three minutes would be used for the learner to attempt to put these two lessons to the test. Allowing the learners to get a feel for the demands placed on their body in order to load and execute a shot, as well as the demands needed to provide enough arc on the ball. These three minutes would also be used for the individuals to receive constant feedback from myself to help adjust their shot and mechanics. Understanding that very little can be adjusted in just three minutes. The ultimate goal would be for them to learn what is needed to complete this skill and for them to try it out for themselves and figure out what works and what doesn’t.

The final four minutes I would use a game scenario for them to best utilize their skill. Something as simple as to see who can complete the most free throw shots in four minutes, in theory having them all have a basketball net for themselves. These four minutes will help simplify what they had learned from the previous six minutes, and to concentrate solely on what worked for them. Some individuals may spend the first minute or so testing out which positions work best for them. Once they established the position that works best, they would be more likely to stick with that position and repeat the movement over and over again to perfect it.

Having only 10 minutes to teach a skill is very challenging regardless of the skill. However, designing the right approach can leave the learner with an understanding of what is needed to accomplish the skill as well as possibly performing a few repetitions successfully. In the event of learning the correct way to shoot a basketball from a free throw line, one can very easily make this process complex. Yet, just focusing on the basics such as simple biomechanics (bending of the legs) and physics (bigger arc of the ball equates to a bigger circumference of the rim), the learner now has the knowledge to build a base of the skill. With proper amount of time practicing and receiving feedback along the way, they can capitalize on those 10 minutes.
